# Mathematical Models: 

## Functions as models 
- Explicit and implicit relationships between variables

An explicit model of something is simply a function that describes its behavior, and it does so explicitly. A model of exponential growth like that of bacteria (but with base e instead of base 2) can be written as 

$y = Ne^{\theta t}$

y is the output itself of the function, t is the dependent variable denoting time (instead of  x, but it can really be any variable you like), N is the initial population size and \theta governs the timeframe at which population increases - the two last ones are parameters in the model.

For example, if time is given in days and for some made up values like $N=10, \theta = 1/2$, we can compute the function value at some points:

i. at time t=0 zero the exponential term is one (e^0 = 1 for any base) so the population size described by this model is simply N (making clear this parameter is indeed the initial population size); 
ii. at time t=1 we have Ne^(1/2) (i.e. the initial population size multiplying the square root of the Napierian number, which is greater than one) 
iii. at time t=2 we have y=Ne

and so on...

more informatively, we can simply graph the population along time by hand on in a computer:

- Implicit models
More often than not, we do not know what is the function that describes a system. Instead, we may have some knowledge about the system in the form of individual processes. Fortunately, this kind of knowledge can be put together into implicit models, which may take the form of differential equations. In our population reproduction example, suppose we do not know its growth is exponential, but only that population grows proportionally to its size; we can formalize that (verbally, initially) in the language of rates of change: the rate of growth in time of population size is proportional to the current size of the population. Mathematically, we write:

dy/dt = \theta y

the parameter theta is included because although growth is proportional to population size, the relationship may not be one-to-one. In this case however, we have not made an explicit statement about the population size, but about its growth. We can, however, generate an explicit output from this implicit description.

This specific differential equation is separable; we can write all terms involving 
on one side and all terms involving on the other: dy/y = \theta dt. We can then integrate both side using standard integration techniques we reviewed last section, the calculations are the following:


_image_

here we rewrote the exponentiated (arbitrary) integration constant as 
just to highlight that we get exactly the same equation as the explicit formulation.

**We didn't review integration for this course, so you don't have to know how to actually integrate the implicit equation and obtain the expolicit one from it, only that this is the aprproach to get a solution. In practice this solution will rarely exist analytically, and we'll have to use numerical integrators, but again, this is beyond the scopue of this course**

This may seem like a roundabout way of getting to the same result, but in general:

i. We do not know what the explicit equation is (as mentioned above); 
ii. It may not be possible to integrate the differential equation analytically;

In the case latter case, however, it is still possible to generate a solution numerically. Starting with an initial condition N
a numerical integration algorithm approximates the (continuous) analytical solution. Ideally we would know everything about a system (I) and be able to solve any equations analytically (II), but since this is not true in general, numerical solutions mean we can always generate a solution.

It is also worth noting that differential equations with one dependent variable have the general 
— the argument would also include any parameters, but since they are fixed for the current purposes we omit them. That means that the righthand size can also have the forms: 
and 
, the latter are called autonomous differential equations, because the rate of change doesn't depend explicitly on the independent variable. That is the case of our exponential model 
, the growth rate depends only on the size of the population, not on time. It will be probably also be the case of most interest, since depending explicitly on an independent variable means there are processes extrinsic to the system that will affect it, but we will also see examples of those.

Again, you don't need to memorize these definitions, what you shoudl take away from this topic is that we can formulate mathematical models from known mechanisms from some system, we can convert these rates of some process into differential equations, and we can integrate these equations analytically or more commonly numerically to generate an explicit output from them.

I'll give an example of a logistic growth model in the context of biology, but the logistic model is also used widely, like in logistic regression, a kind of classification model we'll discuss later in the course. The video is really about bulding a model from a few known mechanisms, and using integration to obtain a solution, and the video is completelyb optional, so if you are not there yet, or don't feel like spending time one that, you don't have to. Just make sure you understand the general principles on formulating an explicit versus an implicit model.

## Not all models are useful, but all are mathematical

- Anything can be a mathematical model
Think of any equation, anything, it could be a mathematical model, if your data looks like some function, you could image that usign that function to describe the relationship between input and output could be helpful. The question really becomes how is it helpful: if you need to understand why the data looks like it does, maybe you need more than a function that resembles the data, it may need tro explain why the data looks like that; if you need a model that is very close to all data you see, and will probably look like new data, it may need to be something more flexible.
        
- Mechanistic models: all models are wrong, but some are mechanistic
As we mentioned, we can build some models from known processes, when you are trying to really reconstruct (to some extent) how the system works, what you are building si a mechanistic model. We saw a few examples, and complexity can escalate quickly for anything but the simples systems.

- Machine Learning models: all models are wrong, and some we don't even understand


