Module 1. Introduction: Basic concepts and definitions

Learning objectives:
Statistical Modeling and Machine Learning are different sides of the same coin. Mathematical Models underly both of them as well as Artifical Intelligence, which is the umbrella to anything that tries to have a response like that of humans. 


Module-level objectives:
In this introductory module we will give a brief introduction to these seemingly separate fields, define some basic concepts we wil use throughout the course, make some broad connections bewtween them and outline the path to acquiring the fundamentals and building on them. By the end of this module you should be able to:

1.	Describe the history and evolution of classic statistical models
2.	Relate popular regression and classification methods to modern algorithms
3.	Define Statistical Modeling

I. Introduction: Basic concepts and definitions
    + **Video**: Instructor presentation and introduction to Quantitative Thinking

        Hi, welcome to **Fundamentals of Quantitative and Statistical thinking for Machine Learning & Artificial Intelligence**. Thank you for registering for this course, I appreciate the interest in this course which is a quite dense combination of concepts, fundamentals, and applications.

        My name is Caetano Souto Maior, I'm the creator and instructor for this course. I hold Bachelor's and Master's of Science degrees in supramolecualr and quantum chemistry, a Master's in Public Health, and a Ph.D. in Computational Biology.  On specific topics related to Artificial Intelligence, I also completed IBM's professional certificate on Machine Learning and DeepLearning.AI's specialization on neural networks. 
        I was a postdoc at NIH between 2017 and 2021, in NHLBI's Systems Biology Center, and I did another postdoc in a joint lab between the Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM, not to be confused with the soccer player) and the University of Oxford.
        But that'stuff you can find in my CV or on LinkedIn; it's important, but it doesn't speak for itself. Instead, I'm going to give a less bullet-pointy description of my background, and how it relates to developing quantitative thinking -- not because it's the only way, the best way, or even the right way of developing this kind of thinking, but to show the complexity and the joy of what you're about to embark on.

        As a natural scientist, I've been trained in physical, computational and quantum chemistry, to later develop graduate work on biostatistics, and in mathematical and computational biology. I identified with essentially all the professional descriptions associated to those areas, except for bioinformatics, which I saw as a somewhat different subject, and in which I didn't do much work (in fact, the people who coined the name bioinformatics had a very different thing in mind, btu that's a different story). I've personally settled on Computational Biologist for convenience and because it was close enough to my main line of work, but that was mostly because Quantitative Biologist is not a common designation. Long story short, well, maybe not so short, but I think quantitative is a better, more general term, so I often like to use it instead of mathematical or statistical thinking (although that's what's on the title).

        I believe quantitative thinking involves more than delegating things that are beyond our subjective abilities to formal descriptions, but rather using them where intuition fails, learning from them, and building intuition into our subjective abilities. So we are not using math as a tool, and especially not as a crutch, maybe more like training wheels. 
        Eventually, you will be able to see without seeing, compute without computing, and imagine beyond what exists. This process takes time, and I don't think it's something you do by simply learning definitions and isolated concepts, but as a process of constant self-improvement; the good news is that it's probably fun and enriching, you notice your mind expanding and your understanding improving. 
        (It's true it can be frustrating at times, but that's because of course some concepts can be hard to grasp, but there's no way around that for learning; more frustrating is the disservice the teaching of STEM was perpetrated against us as kids, and still is to this day, but that too is a different story, and we can't go back and fix it).

        In addition to time and patience, in practice quantitative thinking requires knowledge of core mathematical and statistical concepts. I'll list them here for the record, it's a long-ish list, and even so it doesn't try to be exhaustive, but to give an idea I'm gonna go ahead and do it:

            - Calculus: univariate, multivariate, differential equations, vector calculus
            - Linear Algebra: typical one-semester, plus some additional/optional concepts
            - Probability and Statistics: introductory, classic models, information theory
            - Computer Science: algorithms, discrete mathematics, coding and computational statistics

        Maybe it's due to my early background in the physical sciences -- that's thermodynamics, spectroscopy, quantum chemistry -- where it's all about smooth differential equations (despite a lot of statistical mechanics in things like thermodynamics), and because pure probability and statistics are the topics I had fewer formal courses as an undegrad and graduate student, but I find it less structured, more scattered, and this is my personal opinion, less intuitive and more frustrating. So even though I enjoy these topics now, I undersand why they may not be appealing to begin with, and why they are seen as a laundry list of hard, complicated things I need to know by heart. 
        
        I had four semesters of Calculus and differential equations, four semesters of physics, one of probability and statistics, one of linear algebra, one of numeric methods, and probably more I'm forgetting. But I think I learned a lot more as I went than in all of my core math courses. I also think teaching things like they used to back then can be counterproductive at this day and age: if I had to learn everything I did through formal full-semester courses, I think it would fill several degrees-worth of time. If I had to do it again, I would probably do it differently, and this is the perspective I'm trying to provide in this course, a better one that will be useful to you whether you are a practitioner who wants some general understanding of these methods, someone who works in a different field (life or social sciences) and wants to build a strong quantitatibve foundation to bring to you area of research, or whether you're early in your career and want to approach quantitative thinking in a less monolithic way than is offered in traditional undergraduate degrees or graduate specializations.


    + **Video**: introduction to the course structure and learning philosophy

        So how do I intend to provide a broad perspective of Quantitative thinking through this course?

        This course draws on several subjects and tries to put together a coherent view and broad perspective of Statistical Thinking (I'll often use that interchangeably with Quantitative Thinking, unless the distinction is important and I'll make it explicit). The course is not structured in different parts really, because it's a relatively short, half-semester course, but it starts with a brief general introduction, a brief review/crash course in the most essential mathematical and statistical building blocks as a bare minimum back ground to understand the general picture and be able to put together the basic structures of the later parts of the course.

        It then goes into the the more involved involved subjects, that are topics in their own right, but again the idea is not to cover them extensively and exhaustively, it's to understand what can be done with them, and especially what they enable, how can they aid intuition, thinking, criticizing and hypothesizing. I'd say this is the core of the course, and it's a springboard to everything else within the course and beyond.

        The final third-ish of the course will get into modern applications of these core topics, since they are the bases of Machine Learning, which in turn are the bases of Artificial Intelligence applications. Once again, many of these models and applications are quite complicated or complex, so it would be impossible to cover them in detail, but we will havev covered the basics to allow you to understand the most important aspects, AND to dive deeper into the specifics and work out the details from we leave off.

        So, to be clear, you are not supposed to leave this course with a complete and detailed mathematical understanding of every statistical concept and Machine Learning model we discuss; what you are supposed to leave this course with is a general understanding of the math and statistics underlying modern statistical models and, more importantly, a broad perspective on how to think about problems quantitatively, probabilistically, and through that look at the world, at natural and man-made phenomena in a different, more interesting way.

    


    + **Video**: What is Statistical Modeling, Machine Learning, and Artificial Intelligence?
        - What is Statistical Modeling?
        - What is Machine Learning?
        - What is Artificial Intelligence?
        - Are these really three different things?

        - What are these methods and algorithms actually doing under the hood? Regression, Classification, Neural Networks, Gaussian Processes

    + Discussion and Assignments:
        - What "pre-AI" and "post-AI" apps you use daily?
        - Think through the steps apps need to take to do what they do.
        - How often can you describe them as automated behavior, versus needing explicit numerical calculations?









